I've got to come up with his name right now very well.
He's long since dead, but... Okay, so let's continue.
So this farmer, the reason he was convinced... He's allowing you to use his equipment, okay.
And I think the reason that we gained his confidence, he used to see us working on Sundays and Saturdays when no one else was working.
Yeah.
And finally, one day the second year, first year we just...
scratched it in ourself.
And by 47, he came over one Sunday afternoon.
He drove by in his old pickup and he came in and he said, I see lots of activity over here.
And by then I got so I could say half sentences, make myself understood.
And he said, I see that you people are pretty serious about this business.
And he says, please show me what's going on here.
This was in 47.
November 47?
No, it was 46.
No, we had planned.
He had already sent over the machinery to plant.
the person in charge of the experiment station knew him also.
And so he had condescended to do this, but he had never really come and looked at things before.
This was in April of 47.
And from then on, he always came by and he continued to help us.
And so when Aureliano Campoy was his name, A-U-R-E-L-I-A-M-O, Campoy, C-A-M-P-O-Y,
And so from that day on, he helped us.
I think he knew that he would benefit too.
And then there's another person I need to wave into this.
When I was miserable up there, I'd go up.
We had to cook our own food.
Of course, my old forest service days used to help me a great deal, and I'd cook for these two young people that I used to take up with me.
First, you had to shovel out this old miserable house and clean it up, and I cooked the food, but I didn't have any vehicle to go into town to buy provisions.
Sometimes this farmer would come by, but it soon worked out that there was an elderly widow,
Mrs. Jones, just across, half a mile away.
And she had seen us and found out who we were.
And so she started coming by and she would, on Saturday morning, she said, come on, we'll go into town and buy groceries.
So every, in the period say from mid-January until when we finished that season up there in May, sometimes I would go back once during that period to see what was going on at one of the other experiment stations.
But you'd stay up at Obergon that whole time?
Generally make one trip for a few days to see what was going on in the experiment station in Central Mexico and in Chopinco.
But stay there other than that.
So I'd go with her every Saturday.
And then every Sunday night, she started inviting us over for cake at her home.
And she had an interesting background.
She was born in Connecticut.
And her husband-to-be, she had known when they were young
And he was sold some land there by a pretty strong promotional development company.
There were pictures of this land, irrigated land that was put on by railroad.
This is a promotional thing showing where the water takeoff was from the canal.
Hell, it was just a fake picture.
There wasn't any canal there.
But they were sold this land.
Of course, it was a pretty reasonable price.
But they came down there.
Just very shortly after, I can't put my finger on the years, I'd have to go back to my old notebooks, but it was in the early period before the revolution.
My goodness.
In other words, before 1910, when there were Indian wars and every other thing going on around there, you'd carry a gun when you- Yeah, that's perfect.
And when the water would come in the rivers, they would trap some of it and plant rice and then
put up a few borders high once and capture water and let it sink in and plant wheat.
She went through all of that.
Her husband had long since died.
But they were respected citizens there.
And I knew her son and two daughters, both.
None of them were working on the farm.
And they all sooner or later moved back to the U.S., but she died there.
And she used to help me a great deal.
Going back to this other person, by 48, I organized there, and we were developing this in the other parts of Mexico, too.
How the hell I did it in so many places beyond me with poorly trained people, but by that
Year 48, I had the first plots planted, as well as all kinds of experimental things.
Big program by then, and I'd been joined by Dr. Joe Rupert, who came to our program after he came out of the Army, probably in 40—I suppose he came in 46.
He was also a forester from Minnesota, from up on the range.
He grew up in Everlitt.
After he graduated in forestry, he was a year behind me.
He went to Michigan State and studied plant pathology for a master's on potatoes.
Then he went to West Virginia and did his doctor.
He did his thesis, though, in Mexico with us on wheat and presented it at West Virginia.
He was a tremendous hard worker.
Later moved on to the wheat program as director of the wheat program in Colombia and Chile.
Moved back
in about 1977 to Davis, California, and to Corvallis, and started this spring winter cross.
Unfortunately, he died from acute leukemia, only sick about two weeks, and we rubbed him out.
But he was a very constructive guy, so he and I were up there.
These plots were beautiful.
We thought it was time to organize a farmer's field day to get the rest of the people involved, to win back some... So this is three and a half years after the first experiments, is that right?
Forty-five to forty-eight... Is that about three and a half years after?
Yeah.
Okay.
And which would mean... Three years, three years, but... Which would mean, was this the seventh crop then?
Yes.
Okay.
And so I had three or four of these in small plots.
And I organized a field day, and I held it on Sunday.
I thought maybe I could get some of the people to come then.
I spent a couple of days, I rode in with Mrs. Jones, and in my own awkwardness, and with the director who was afraid, really, of the farmers.
I went to the government office to control agricultural credits
various government agencies.
And I said, we're going to hold this field day.
It's going to be such and such an hour on a Sunday.
This was when the grain was ripening.
We're going to have a barbecue.
We're going to have beer, free.
Where'd you get the funds for this?
Artify budget, weight budget.
We had this flexibility.
You mean you could afford to do something like that and you couldn't afford transportation?
We couldn't get the vehicles.
Oh.
Why not?
And by then we had vehicles back in Mexico, but they used to take seven to eight days driving out through the desert and crossing and fording rivers.
There were no roads.
And as a matter of fact, this 48, when I knew we were going to harvest this plot and we didn't have anything except improvised thrashing machines before that were miserable, I had finally bought one in the US and it came to Mexico.
I put it on this truck.
We had those war tires that blew out every little bit and I took a pickup and we had that Chevrolet truck with this Pullman nursery trasher for thrashing the yield plots and all of the bags, paper bags for harvesting and tags and so on.
And I figured I couldn't get through across the rivers along the West Coast.
Pan American Highway haven't been built yet, except the northernmost part down to Hermesil.
And so, but you could drive to El Paso.
So, I went that way and I checked.
with the American Embassy that I would be able to go through there and back into Mexico without difficulties.
Hell, I got to the border and I got into the worst mess I've ever seen on customs regulations.
I said, you can't bring this out, you can't show a certificate that it was produced in the USA, so it's probably illegally importing this through the USA and you may resell it.
even though it was stamped all over there, Bill's Welding, Pullman, Washington, and the tires were US made, the whole gamut of things, but this is the bureaucracy.
I spent all one afternoon, my liver and heart and the rest of the internal organs was ready to explode with this bureaucracy.
Couldn't work it out.
Next morning I went back again and I was curious.
And finally, they condescended to let me ship it in bond and drive the truck, ourself, back to Nogales, Sonora, or Nogales, Arizona, and into Mexico.
Then we would have to take the trashing machine, the extra tires, and the bags, and all of the other things we had to have for harvest.
And then, to make it worse,
When it was trans-ship, we got to Nogales.
Rupert was with me.
He was driving, or he was—I had a driver for the truck.
We waited two days in Nogales, and it never showed up.
Somebody misshipped it to California.
So, we had to put a tracer on it, and finally it got there.
By then I was ready to have a stroll.
I talked to the customs person in Nogales, and he said, you should never have been put through this miserable treatment they've given you.
What they told us, what you were told in the embassy, American embassy in Mexico, was correct.
But the new customs officer there was throwing the book at you.
Because he was covering his tracks, he had been in trouble on another place where he had let something go through that shouldn't have gone through.
So he was putting all kinds of things in front of him.
So he went down, and that's when everything was beautiful.
We were there getting close to harvest.
I set up the field day, and I was hopeful I'd get fair turnout.
All we got is about 25 people.
Only five of them were farmers.
The rest were bureaucrats.
government people.
Why do you think the turnout was so poor?
I didn't believe anything was happening.
We hadn't had any publicity, except these few people right next door, neighbors that had seen it.
But there was one young engineer, graduate from Chipingo, who was just starting to farm, engineer Rafael Angel Fierros, who came, and there were four other people.
But he was the only person with a technical background.
The others were, I would say, most of them kind of poor farmers that came.
But one came, I left a connection here at Texas A&M.
The second year when I was in Mexico growing my plots, 45, second, third year, 46, a young Aggie showed up.
He was a Mexican.
Pablo Mauri.
And he said, I'd like to work to get some experience in your plots this summer.
And I said, OK, come on and work.
He was studying here.
He came from a family in the state of Puebla who had lost all of their land during the reform.
And his father, his mother's husband, he was a three quarters brother to the man I'm going to tell you about.
Kind of complicated situation.
He was shot and killed from ambush when the farm was taken over.
And so he worked, and he was a very enthusiastic guy, and he said, my brother has just got some land in Sonora that were given as compensation as just brush for what was taken away from us 20 years ago, or essentially 20, a little more than 20.
And he said, his name is Roberto, and I want you to meet him.
He needs help.
He doesn't know anything because we lost our land, and he never had a chance to work on the land.
So he was one of the people that came.
And it was contact, one of my closest and most intimate contacts for all of those years, and we're still close friends.
He became a very good farmer.
And this other one engineer, Fieros, and three other farmers,
not of much substance.
But the curious thing was during the course of the week when we were pulling out plants and trying to trash and harvest and busy, here would come two or three farmers, say, we hear that you've got some interesting things going on out here.
And this went on, I don't know how many there were, maybe 20 more in groups of two or three, including Kais came by.
And so the next year, and then I thought it was time that we tried to reestablish wood relations with Kais.
And so when we showed them those plots in that spring of 48, I said, we're going to multiply these this summer, thrashing these, there'll be a couple of tons of seed
of total to three, maybe three tons, which it turned out to be.
I'll put it on this truck, I'm taking it up the high valleys, I'm going to plant it in early May, and we'll ship back some considerable quantities of seed from other vacation.
And I would like to see part of this planted on at least three farms, maybe five.
depending on how much seed we get, how good our multiplication is, because this was new, too, in the summer.
And there were some people interested, and especially this guy who had given us his machinery, this engineer Fierros who graduated from Chipengo.
Roberto Mauri, I'd gone out to see his farmer.
He was pretty darn miserable, all full of weeds, and he didn't have equipment either, and I wasn't sure that he
was a very good farmer.
He wasn't at that time.
He became one.
Yeah.
And so, I didn't give him any of the seed.
And so, he put it around on about four farms.
And, of course, Cayce, the innovator he was, he had come up into Texas and he had seen the variety Austin.
which was a sister to one of the varieties that we had tested and really multiplied for central Mexico, but it didn't fit Sonora because beautiful plants, big head, yielded pretty well, but it had a sterile neck and it was fragile.
And when the wind would blow and when it was dry, the whole head would fall on the ground.
And it would happen right when you were ready to start the harvest.
And so, Caiz used to like to stick needles in me, and I think he wasn't convinced even then.
So, he condescended to plant a part of this first variety, Yaqui and Quintana, on his farm, but a bit begrudgingly.
And it was on Ingeniero Fiero's farm and this elderly gent, Campoy, next door neighbor, and one other farm, I think.
And about how many acres on each farm?
I think at that time it turned out that there was probably five to ten acres, depending, varied from place to place.
That's all the seed we had.
But I skipped one thing that's important.
After that harvest, when I moved the seed to Mexico, I refused to go back through the USA.
I knew, by God, if I tried to go back through that with seed, I would never make it and they'd probably take it away from me.
So I took off down through the desert and through there were a few trucks that were finding their way through and at that time the only way we could cross the rivers, they used to have two rowboats and they'd put planks across them, build a platform and you'd put the pickup on that or the truck and then they would pull you across the rivers.
There weren't any ferries per se except these improvised ones.
So, we got the seed back.
It was a miserable thing.
I slept up.
We found a guy that... There's roads going every direction out through the desert, the Mesquite and whatnot.
You don't know which one to take.
So, late in the afternoon, we wanted to get the mochas the first night.
We couldn't tell where we were going.
There was a guy standing on the side of the road waving, and Rupert had gone ahead with the pickup.
or he'd gone back the other way.
And so, I was there with the truck driver.
I wanted to make sure the seed went through.
And this guy waved and wanted to ride, and we asked him if he knew the way to Moches.
And he said, oh, sure, I know all of this very well.
And so, he got up on top of the sacks.
Hell, it was getting dark, and he'd send us off in the wrong direction, and he didn't know where he was either.
Finally, we ended up
in the dark as hell down in the narrow canyon where we couldn't turn around rocks and boulders.
And I was afraid we were going to tear the whole bottom out of the motor or the transmission.
And I said, we'll have to stop here.
And Gustavo, the chauffeur, said, I'm worried about this character.
He doesn't look like a very respectable citizen.
He may club us over the head here.
And I said, well, we'll make a show of it.
And we had to cook our own food.
I always carried food at that time, an old forestry thing.
And so I got my shotgun out from behind the seat.
By the same time I took my cooking gear and we cooked up supper there for the three of us.
And Gustavo said,
You sleep here in the cab, and I'll sleep up on top.
And he made a big show of the shotgun.
And this guy went to sleep over in the brush.
He had a blanket.
We weren't very comfortable, but nothing happened to us.
And it took us the whole next day to get back and find where we should have gone to get across the next river, which is a big one, to the town of Los Moches.
To make a long story short, it probably took us
It probably took us four days to get to where the road was halfway decent, Guadalajara.
But we got it planted and we got it done going.
And what were the results?
Okay, the next, I left out the,
devilish trouble that we had of getting the seed that we planted that we are harvesting now.
I forgot this.
I nearly drowned.
Drowned.
You did?
Where was this?
This was in one of those same rivers that we were now trying to cross going south.
Down toward Guadalajara?
Down towards Guadalajara in the state of Nayarit.
When we took the seed up that fall before which I'm speaking now to plant,
I went by a different route.
I heard that there was a new road being built from Durango, which is the road that went to El Paso.
And I wanted to explore this.
And there were two pickups then.
Rupert had one, and he had one of our young Mexican engineers with him, Campos Tierra Fria, Alfredo Campos.
And I had a young Guatemalan with me who was training with us.
Oscar Neri Sosa.
And we had the seed for the experimental plantings and we had these little bags that were the predecessors of these plots that I've just described.
We drove, the road was paved up to Durango and went on to El Paso.
Cidal Juarez and El Paso.
But we turned off at Durango and took this road that went through the
worst most rugged part of the of the sierra madre occidental it was opened probably originally because of lumbering timber industries logging company and it was went through really rugged country since then it's become a tourist attraction and it runs along the rim of the copper canyon
Barranca de Cobre, which is as spectacular as the, and in some ways, much larger than Grand Canyon.
Really rugged country.
Turned out that it was in November.
It wasn't supposed to be raining.
But when we got out there, it started to rain, and this was a one-way brecha, just a one-way pass that had been opened.
and the mud started sliding down.
And so we were trapped with the two pickups.
But in front of us, there was a truck that was also trapped.
And it turned out that that truck was a government highway truck loaded with dynamite.
And they were trapped in there also.
And then behind us was another pickup.
And we all got trapped in mudslides on both sides.
We couldn't go and just narrowly look down at the face of the devil himself down there below.
Couldn't go either way.
Oh, I don't understand.
Why couldn't you go back?
Because there'd been another mudslide that came down after we'd come past it.
My goodness, the quality of the road just must have been terrible.
Oh, just narrow.
And it gets slippery, this stuff that's sliding down.
You didn't even dare to back up, but we had no choice.
You couldn't, because there was another mudslide.
And I was the only outfit that had, I had a big steel box in the back of my pickup, always had it, full of canned food and my cooking equipment and fishing tackle and my shotgun and sleeping bag.
So hell, here we were trapped and I had to cook and feed these people.
That day, and it kept wristling, it was miserable.
kept a big fire going the whole time to keep warm.
I sat around and drank coffee most of it.
I had a sleeping bag, so I was all right, but most of them didn't.
I was the only one that had this.
And they were miserable and kept drinking with coffee and thinking somebody was going to come from the road outfit to get us the next day.
The whole day went by and we were starting to run out of food.
And I had two, six,
nine people.
I'd always had provisions for two or three, but not for nine.
So it was into the second day when the big bulldozer finally showed up looking for that dynamite truck, and the pickup behind was the engineer in charge of that area of construction, the highway department.
So they came looking for them,
If you were lucky you were with them, you might still be down there.
Sure.
And so, to make a long story short, how to get it out of there.
This bulldozer would start moving this stuff, and it would keep sliding again in front of the truck.
But you kept pushing it, and you could hear it go crashing down this precipitous drop-off in this part of the cliff, right at the worst part.
They call it the spine of the devil, this particular place.
Finally, the engineer says, look, we're going to hook your pickup.
I was the lead pickup.
Then we had the seat and the whole thing there covered with canvas, of course.
He says, we're gonna hook you on the back of that dynamite truck because there may be another one of these things slide down and we may be here a couple more days if we go one by one.
And I said, are you sure that I'm not gonna float right over with this mud right over the cliff?
He said, well, let's try it out.
And so this was full of dynamite also.
And so I got hooked on and we sort of floated across this mud.
and got through and we got the other two through and we finally got to Mazatlan about 10 o'clock that night and Joe Rupert and I went into the bar to have a drink and I should have said that with this Mexican road engineer was a Soviet geologist and he was a pretty ornery character.
Especially to Rupert, because when they were sitting around the campfire to keep from freezing to death, they started to exchange stories.
He said, were you in service during World War II?
Joe said, yes.
He said, what theater?
North Africa.
Joe was in the Medical Corps.
And this Russian was kind of a nasty guy.
I don't think he meant to be that way.
I think he didn't command the English language very much.
And he said, oh, he said, hell, Rommel kicked the hell out of you guys from one end to the other.
And boy, that wasn't any good for Joe.
And so they just didn't hit it off at all.
And sitting around there for a day and a half, a little more, close to two days,
that didn't rub very well.
So when we finally got a shower and we went into the bar before we were going to eat in this restaurant, and I was talking to Joe and he was still fuming about this Russian, and here he went and sat right beside him and started barbing again.
So we couldn't go north.
All of these rivers were in flood stage.
Couldn't get across.
with the seed.
So we put Ingeniero Alfredo Campos with all the seed on the train.
The train was still going across the railroad bridges.
And what'd you do with the pickups?
Did you put those on the train too?
Couldn't.
Oh.
And so we had to go back.
And so we put him in charge of making the plantings that I have just told about harvesting.
And we headed back for Mexico.
There was nothing else we could do.
We couldn't get through.
And we had plantings to make elsewhere.
And then we got
down to a place in Nayarit, late in the afternoon.
It was just getting dark.
And there were some women picking up their laundry on the side of the road.
And I said, where's the batanga, those rowboats that take the pickups across?
And they said they left about an hour ago.
But they said the truck just went across there after they'd left.
There's a wide river.
And I always carried equipment.
I carried the rubber hose that I put over the exhaust pipe and tie it up above the back that they'd pick up and take off the fan belt and put a split old inner tube over to keep the wire from getting shorted out.
And I'd gone across pretty deep water.
So there was no place to stay there, no place to eat.
And we were only about seven or eight miles from the little town.
And I also saw, before it was too dark, that there was a road camp, construction, just across the river.
So I took off across this, and I told Joe, you better not get in too far here, till we see what happens.
Hell, I got out there, and the next thing I knew, that damn water was up in my feet, inside the cab.
And the motors, of course, shorted out, and...
Jesus, I was out and the water was fast and was nearly dark.
Not a nice place to spend the evening.
No, and I wasn't sure that I could suddenly begin to realize that the river must have been rising since that truck went through.
Sure.
There'd been rains, the same rains that we'd come through, draining all down into this.
And so, I fortunately took off my boots.
And hell, I got into this and
I had to swim and struggle, and it carried me downstream, but I got to the other shore.
Then I went up to that, and I told Rupert to stay, and the guy that was with me in the cab, I had a terrible time.
It was a Sunday evening, and I went to find at this work road camp the engineer in charge of the construction crew, and he'd gone to this movie about eight miles away.
and I had no way to get there, and they didn't have any transport, and I found the operator of this big lever, you know, the one with the big blade conformador, we say in Spanish, I don't remember what you call them in English.
Like a bulldozer?
Yes, but not the bulldozer, the ones that you would level with.
Grader?
Grader.
The bulldozer wasn't there, it was farther away.
where they were working on beds.
And I said, look, this is a government truck.
We've got two of them down there.
We're going to loose them with this flood.
Help.
He said, I can't do it without the engineer's approval.
I said, well, we can't get down there.
He said, I don't have any transport.
I said, these are official cars.
And I'll take the responsibility and explain it to them as soon as we get these salvaged.
Then he said, well, there's very little gas in the tank, and I don't have a key to the gas tank.
And I stuck a stick down there, and it's true, there was very little, but I said, let's have a go at it.
And they had some big, long cables like this, and I got about eight people with me, and we went out there.
In the greater?
In the greater, we had long cables.
And by then, the water was running over the top of the hood.
And this guy that I'd left there was standing on top of the cab.
Of course, I didn't know it with the current, because it dug this thing down so that the whole chassis was sitting on the gravel.
Then I figured, well, as soon as we pulled it free, why did it flip over?
First, we had a devil of a time, we had a big loop on it, getting it hooked under the bumpers of all we could hook onto.
The water and running fast.
And it took us quite a while till we finally got it hooked on.
And then I said, all right, now all of us have to hang on the upstream side or it'll flip over like this when we pull it loose.
We got it pulled out and it floated.
And we got it out and we pulled Rupert across.
And that's all we could do then, but we were done up.
The next morning, when the engineer came, I explained.
You didn't run out of gas then, with a grant?
No.
We made it.
And so, the next morning, we started to see what we could do.
There wasn't a drop of oil in the crankcase.
It had all floated out.
everything was a mess.
It took us most of the day to get the two cars started again.
But we salvaged them.
And I got back to Mexico.
So you can see some of the things that we had to do.
Okay, that seed, compost took it up and planted it.
And now, this is out of order, but you'll be able to sort it out.
The results were what that field day, what we showed the farmers.
But before we showed them that,
Oh, this story happened before the first field day?
No, before the second one.
Oh, that's right.
This one where we had beautiful things and where there were 200 rather than 25, and most of them were four years.
So we're in 1948, basically, is that when?
Yes.
The fall of 47 was what I just described.
Was the first field day?
No.
Oh.
Yes.
That was the spring of 1947 was the first year.
What we're talking about now is between the spring and fall of 1947.
Yes.
Okay.
The fall of 1947 was this struggle where we couldn't get the seed through except on the train and they nearly got drowned going back.
Then I went up there and spent most of January, February, March and... 48.
48.
And these were beautiful then.
We had this second field day organized and there were probably 200.
I have the exact numbers.
And there was Cayce and there was Jorge Parada and Eduardo Vargas who were...
two or three of the best farmers in the area.
By then we had also had results for the second year on fertilizer, but we hadn't shown it to them yet.
But the important thing here was these plots.
We didn't show them even this time, the fertilizer tests.
And they were beautiful.
But just a matter of
And we showed it to them and they were pretty impressed.
And I asked Caiz and Fieros and this elderly farmer neighbor, Campoy, how their plots looked, their entries.
Well, Fieros and Campoy were pretty enthusiastic, but Caiz was pretty ultra conservative and he said, well, I got a better wheat that I bought in Texas.
I suspected what it was.
I said, I'm going to stop and see it next Saturday when I go for groceries.
And so I did, and it had been planted early.
And that Saturday, I stopped and looked at it, and I knew what it was.
It was Austin.
And I said, but down the road they'll fall.
It looks beautiful now, but those heads will fall off.
Unless you harvest it a little on the green side, when the wind starts blowing in the low environment or low relative humidity, they'll all break and they'll be on the ground.
What did he say about it?
Well, he thought I was exaggerating.
I asked him about his Yaqui and Kentan and he said, well, they don't look very impressive.
It so happened that I
I had to go back again on Sunday.
I don't remember what the occasion was.
Something I had to get to finish our harvest, I guess.
And as I drove by this farm, here he is out there waving his hands and screaming and hollering.
And he had three combines out in this seven or eight hectare field.
And I stopped and went in and said, what's the matter, Don Rodolfo?
He says, look at it.
Yesterday when we looked at it, it was standing beautifully.
And he said, look, there's 25, 30% of the heads already on the ground.
I couldn't say, that's what I told you.
But this made a complete turnaround.
And he still didn't talk about the Zyati or Cantana.
And he hadn't harvested when I left to make the summer plantings.
But it turned out that they were excellent compared to anything else.
And from then, we were going downhill.
But the farmers had counted, the ones that counted.
And tell me about these two different types of weeds now.
The first two that we multiplied?
Yeah.
Well, we produced them.
in three and a half years instead of 10.
We had them going out onto farms.
Why could you do that when others thought you could never do that?
Because we didn't pay any attention that they had to be selected all the time in that same environment.
We moved them across 700 miles of latitude from 28 to 18, and from 120 foot above sea level up to 8,500 feet.
in order to find the right environment for the growth of the plant at different seasons in that geographic area.
We couldn't replant it on the coast.
Temperatures were high at Cook in the summer.
And we couldn't replant it always in the High Valley or we wouldn't know whether it would fit on the coast.
But when you moved them back and forth and you selected for the best plants under both conditions, suddenly they fit.
The book was wrong.
The book was right for the time it was written.
Sure.
But this, 25 years later, became the basis of why we were able to move whole shiploads full of seed halfway around the world to India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Turkey, and so on.
To Argentina, Brazil.
But we didn't know... Because what you had done then is develop a type of wheat that was... Photo-insensitive.
Photo-period insensitive.
Okay, what is that?
Plants, this was in the early days when our agricultural crops were not thought to have been photoperiod sensitive.
Now, and it was just opening up.
It had been recognized, I think first in California, that the Christmas poinsettia, the one that sold at Christmas in the northern
part of the U.S.
There was a shrub of this growing in a yard and it had been shaded by the building so it didn't get the full hours of sunlight.
And some of them came into flower and some didn't.
And this provoked why.
And already they had found out that chrysanthemums, if you shortened the day growing in the greenhouse, you would get them to come onto flower earlier.
And this was...
for homecoming and whatnot in the football games, the way they were already starting to grow chrysanthemums, to get them to flower at the right time of the year, by manipulating numbers of hours of sunlight or light.
But, it was not thought to have been a factor in agricultural crops.
or in animals.
Now, of course, this is one of the explanations of the close fit, very often of adaptive varieties for climate and so on.
Light.
There can be others.
Temperature.
And it's pretty complex.
Or in poultry.
The reason they leave the lights on
for a certain number of hours.
I've forgotten what it is for egg production.
I think they need about 14 hours.
It's not just because they feed more, but it's got to do with the ovules functioning.
It goes clear back to the wild, when they probably nested only, laid eggs only for a wild clutch of eggs, when they were still wild jungle cock.
When the day length was right, they knew it was time to lay eggs, or the hormone system told them.
They incubated and the chicks were born.
But with modern egg production, you manipulate it so that that hen, with proper feeding and proper light, she continues to lay eggs the whole year.
So all of this has unfolded since then, but we were dealing with this
empirically without knowing what we were doing, but we could see it was working.
And one of my former professors, not Stakeman, but Dr. Hayes, came down to visit us.
By then we had these already out in commercial, must have been in about 1950 or so.
And we were looking at our summer nursery in Chipingo.
It was in July, early July, and it was about so high, about six inches high, before they hid it.
And he said, Norm, where was this material grown last generation?
And I said, .
He said, I don't know anything about the geography of Mexico.
Tell me in words I can understand.
He was a very blunt individual, a very good scientist.
So I told him, well, we're 18 degrees latitude here, and we're 7,500 feet.
Last generation, and this was planted in late May.
We're now early July.
The last generation, it was planted in November at 28 degrees latitude, 700 miles north of the area at 120 foot elevation.
And he held his hands up like this to his head, and he said, my God, you didn't learn the first lesson in my first plant breeding course.
Don't you remember that you had to have
The selections and the genotypes adapted to the environment in which you're going to grow them.
I said, yeah, but there was something wrong.
Something else has happened here.
We've moved them back and forth, and we find some that adapt to both.
They're already in commercial production.
So how did your former professor take that?
He didn't believe it really then.
But it's a sad thing, and it shows how it haunted him.
Late in life, I can't tell you when he had, he probably had Alzheimer's disease.
He had lost his mental capacity.
He lived several years in that befuddled situation.
And I suppose it was long about 1966 or 7, sometime after these Mexican weeks were pretty well known in different places.
I was in Minnesota and I...